.\" Manpage for localectl (localed bash client)
.TH LOCALECTL 1 "June 2026" "localed" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
localectl \- control the system locale and keyboard layout
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B localectl
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.IR COMMAND " [" ARGUMENT ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B localectl
is a Bash client used to query and change the system locale and
keyboard layout configuration.
.PP
Unlike a typical D-Bus client,
.B localectl
writes directly to
.I /etc/locale.conf
and
.I /etc/vconsole.conf
(and, for X11 keyboard settings,
.IR /etc/X11/xorg.conf.d/00-keyboard.conf ).
The
.B localed
daemon watches these files with
.BR inotify (7)
and automatically updates its
.B org.freedesktop.locale1
D-Bus properties and emits
.B PropertiesChanged
signals whenever they are modified, whether by
.B localectl
or any other tool. This means
.B localectl
itself never talks to D-Bus or PolKit; it relies on ordinary file
permissions, and most subcommands require root.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B status
Show the current locale and keyboard configuration in human-readable
form. This is the default command when none is given.
.TP
.BI list-keymaps " [FILTER]"
List all console keymaps installed under
.IR /usr/share/kbd/keymaps/ .
Keymap names are derived by stripping the directory path and
.B .map.gz
(or
.BR .map )
extension from each file found.
The optional
.I FILTER
argument is passed to
.BR grep (1)
as a case-insensitive pattern.
Does not require root.
.TP
.BI list-locales " [FILTER]"
List all locales available to the C library via
.BR "locale -a" .
The optional
.I FILTER
argument is passed to
.BR grep (1)
as a case-insensitive pattern, so
.B "localectl list-locales en_US"
narrows the output to en_US locales only.
Does not require root.
.TP
.BI set-locale " KEY=value [KEY=value ...]"
Set one or more locale variables.
.I KEY
must be one of
.BR LANG ,
.BR LANGUAGE ,
.BR LC_CTYPE ,
.BR LC_NUMERIC ,
.BR LC_TIME ,
.BR LC_COLLATE ,
.BR LC_MONETARY ,
.BR LC_MESSAGES ,
.BR LC_PAPER ,
.BR LC_NAME ,
.BR LC_ADDRESS ,
.BR LC_TELEPHONE ,
.BR LC_MEASUREMENT ,
or
.BR LC_IDENTIFICATION .
Each assignment is written to
.IR /etc/locale.conf .
Passing an empty value (e.g.
.BR LC_TIME= )
removes that key from the file.
.TP
.BI set-keymap " KEYMAP [KEYMAP_TOGGLE]"
Set the virtual console keymap (and optionally the toggle keymap).
Written to
.I /etc/vconsole.conf
as
.B KEYMAP
and
.BR KEYMAP_TOGGLE .
.TP
.BI set-x11-keymap " LAYOUT [MODEL [VARIANT [OPTIONS]]]"
Set the X11 keyboard layout.
.I LAYOUT
is required; all other arguments are optional and default to an empty
string (which suppresses that Option line in the Xorg config).
Written to
.IR /etc/X11/xorg.conf.d/00-keyboard.conf .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show a short usage summary and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Show the current status:
.PP
.RS
.EX
localectl status
.EE
.RE
.PP
List all available locales:
.PP
.RS
.EX
localectl list-locales
.EE
.RE
.PP
List only en_US locales:
.PP
.RS
.EX
localectl list-locales en_US
.EE
.RE
.PP
Set the system locale:
.PP
.RS
.EX
localectl set-locale LANG=en_US.UTF-8
.EE
.RE
.PP
Set multiple locale variables at once:
.PP
.RS
.EX
localectl set-locale LANG=en_US.UTF-8 LC_TIME=en_GB.UTF-8
.EE
.RE
.PP
Set the console keymap:
.PP
.RS
.EX
localectl set-keymap us
.EE
.RE
.PP
Set the X11 keyboard layout with a variant:
.PP
.RS
.EX
localectl set-x11-keymap de pc105 nodeadkeys
.EE
.RE
.PP
Set the X11 layout, model, variant, and compose key option:
.PP
.RS
.EX
localectl set-x11-keymap us pc105 "" compose:ralt
.EE
.RE
.TP
.BI list-x11-keymap-models " [FILTER]"
List available X11 keyboard models from
.IR /usr/share/X11/xkb/rules/base.lst .
The optional
.I FILTER
is matched case-insensitively against the model code and description.
.TP
.BI list-x11-keymap-layouts " [FILTER]"
List available X11 keyboard layouts.
.TP
.BI "list-x11-keymap-variants [LAYOUT] [FILTER]"
List available X11 keyboard variants.
When
.I LAYOUT
is given, only variants that apply to that layout are printed
(matching the
.RI \(lq LAYOUT : \(rq
prefix in
.IR base.lst ).
.I FILTER
is applied on top of the layout restriction.
.TP
.BI list-x11-keymap-options " [FILTER]"
List available X11 keyboard options (e.g. compose key, Ctrl placement).
.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns 0 on success and 1 on error (for example, an unknown locale
variable, an invalid value, a missing argument, or insufficient
permissions).
.SH AUTHORIZATION
All subcommands other than
.B status
require root. There is no PolKit prompt or D-Bus round trip in
.B localectl
itself; the daemon's PolKit policy governs only direct D-Bus callers
such as
.BR gnome-control-center (1).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/locale.conf
System locale settings. Rewritten atomically (temporary file plus
rename) on every write. Created automatically on first root invocation
if missing.
.TP
.I /etc/rc.d/rc.keymap
Slackware console keyboard script. Regenerated atomically on every
.B set-keymap
invocation. The directory is created automatically if missing.
.TP
.I /etc/rc.d/rc.keymap.toggle
Sidecar file for the toggle keymap. Created when a toggle keymap is
set; removed when the toggle is cleared.
.TP
.I /etc/X11/xorg.conf.d/00-keyboard.conf
Xorg InputClass keyboard configuration. Rewritten atomically on every
write. The parent directory is created automatically if missing.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR localed (8),
.BR locale.conf (5),
.BR vconsole.conf (5),
.BR inotify (7)
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Nathaniel Russell.
.PP
Part of the
.B localed
project, a non-systemd implementation of the
.B org.freedesktop.locale1
D-Bus interface for Slackware Linux.
.SH LICENSE
This program is free software, distributed under the GNU General Public
License, version 2 or later. See the source for copying conditions.
