.\" Manpage for localed
.TH LOCALED 8 "June 2026" "localed" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
localed \- D-Bus locale and keyboard management daemon for non-systemd Linux systems
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /usr/libexec/localed
.RB [ \-\-debug ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B localed
is a standalone system daemon that implements the
.B org.freedesktop.locale1
D-Bus interface using direct D-Bus activation, with no dependency on
.IR systemd .
It exposes the same locale and keyboard properties as
.BR systemd-localed (8)
on systemd-based distributions, allowing desktop tools such as
.B gnome-control-center
to read and edit the system locale and keyboard configuration on
systems that use
.B elogind
and a D-Bus/PolKit stack without systemd.
.PP
.B localed
does not poll or hold any files open for writing on its own initiative.
Instead it watches its source files with
.BR inotify (7)
and re-reads them whenever they change, regardless of who changed them
\(em the bundled
.BR localectl (1)
client, a hand edit, or any other tool. After a resync it emits
.B PropertiesChanged
on the D-Bus object for every property whose value actually changed.
.PP
.B localed
is normally started on demand by D-Bus activation when a client first
calls a method or reads a property on the
.B org.freedesktop.locale1
bus name. It can also be started manually for debugging.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Enable verbose debug logging to standard error in addition to syslog.
.SH "D-BUS INTERFACE"
.B localed
registers the object
.B /org/freedesktop/locale1
on the system bus, implementing the
.B org.freedesktop.locale1
interface.
.SS Properties
All properties are read-only over D-Bus; values are changed via the
.B Set*
methods described below, or by editing the underlying files directly
(see
.BR FILES ),
which
.B localed
picks up automatically via inotify.
.TP
.B Locale \fR(as)
An array of
.RB ` KEY=value '
strings describing the active locale settings.
Keys are drawn from the standard set:
.BR LANG ,
.BR LANGUAGE ,
.BR LC_CTYPE ,
.BR LC_NUMERIC ,
.BR LC_TIME ,
.BR LC_COLLATE ,
.BR LC_MONETARY ,
.BR LC_MESSAGES ,
.BR LC_PAPER ,
.BR LC_NAME ,
.BR LC_ADDRESS ,
.BR LC_TELEPHONE ,
.BR LC_MEASUREMENT ,
and
.BR LC_IDENTIFICATION .
Only keys with non-empty values are included in the array; absent keys
are not emitted as empty strings. Values are read from
.I /etc/locale.conf
(see
.BR FILES ).
.TP
.B VConsoleKeymap \fR(s)
The primary virtual console keymap name, read from the
.B KEYMAP
key in
.IR /etc/vconsole.conf .
.TP
.B VConsoleKeymapToggle \fR(s)
The secondary (toggle) console keymap, read from the
.B KEYMAP_TOGGLE
key in
.IR /etc/vconsole.conf .
May be empty.
.TP
.B X11Layout \fR(s)
The XkbLayout string (e.g.
.RB ` us ',
.RB ` de ',
.RB ` gb,us ')
read from the Xorg InputClass config file (see
.BR FILES ).
.TP
.B X11Model \fR(s)
The XkbModel string (e.g.
.RB ` pc105 ').
.TP
.B X11Variant \fR(s)
The XkbVariant string (e.g.
.RB ` intl '
or
.RB ` nodeadkeys ').
May be empty.
.TP
.B X11Options \fR(s)
The XkbOptions string (e.g.
.RB ` terminate:ctrl_alt_bksp,compose:ralt ').
May be empty.
.SS Methods
.TP
.B SetLocale(as locale, b interactive)
Validates and writes the given locale assignments to
.IR /etc/locale.conf .
Each element of
.I locale
must be of the form
.IR KEY = value ,
where
.I KEY
is one of the fourteen known locale variable names and
.I value
uses only alphanumerics plus
.BR _ , . , - , @ , : , .
An empty
.I value
removes that key from the file. Unknown keys cause the entire call to
fail. Requires the
.B org.freedesktop.locale1.set-locale
PolKit action.
.TP
.B SetVConsoleKeyboard(s keymap, s keymap_toggle, b convert, b interactive)
Writes
.I keymap
and
.I keymap_toggle
to
.IR /etc/vconsole.conf .
When
.I convert
is
.B true
and
.I keymap
is non-empty, a matching X11 layout is derived from the built-in
conversion table and written to the Xorg keyboard config file. The
conversion is best-effort; if no mapping exists for
.IR keymap ,
the X11 file is left unmodified. Requires the
.B org.freedesktop.locale1.set-keyboard
PolKit action.
.TP
.B SetX11Keyboard(s layout, s model, s variant, s options, b convert, b interactive)
Writes the Xorg
.IR InputClass
keyboard stanza (XkbLayout, XkbModel, XkbVariant, XkbOptions) to the
keyboard config file. When
.I convert
is
.B true
and
.I layout
is non-empty, a matching console keymap is derived from the built-in
conversion table and written to
.IR /etc/vconsole.conf .
Requires the
.B org.freedesktop.locale1.set-keyboard
PolKit action.
.PP
For every method that takes an
.I interactive
argument, a value of
.B true
indicates the caller is willing to wait for a PolKit authentication
dialog; a value of
.B false
means the call fails immediately with
.B org.freedesktop.DBus.Error.AuthFailed
unless the caller is already authorised.
.SH AUTHORIZATION
Access to the
.B Set*
methods over D-Bus is controlled by
.BR polkit (8)
using the following actions, declared in
.IR /usr/share/polkit-1/actions/org.freedesktop.locale1.policy :
.TP
.B org.freedesktop.locale1.set-locale
.TQ
.B org.freedesktop.locale1.set-keyboard
.PP
By default these actions require
.B auth_admin
for inactive or remote callers and
.B auth_admin_keep
for an active local session, matching upstream
.BR systemd-localed (8)
policy. A PolKit rule installed at
.I /usr/share/polkit-1/rules.d/org.freedesktop.locale1.rules
additionally grants unconditional access to members of the privileged
group selected at build time (default
.RB ` wheel ',
see the
.B privileged-group
meson option), so desktop session tools are not prompted for a password
on every locale or keyboard change. Group membership changes only take
effect for new login sessions.
.PP
These PolKit actions govern D-Bus callers only. The bundled
.BR localectl (1)
client bypasses D-Bus entirely and writes the underlying files
directly; its own authorization is ordinary Unix file permissions,
meaning it requires root for every write subcommand.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/locale.conf
System locale settings, stored as
.BR KEY=value
assignments. Read for the
.B Locale
property; written atomically by
.B SetLocale
and by
.BR localectl (1).
Watched with
.BR inotify (7).
.TP
.I /etc/rc.d/rc.keymap
Slackware console keyboard script. Called by the boot process to load
the keyboard map via
.BR loadkeys (1).
.B localed
parses the
.B loadkeys
argument for the
.B VConsoleKeymap
property and regenerates the script atomically when
.B SetVConsoleKeyboard
is called. Watched with
.BR inotify (7).
.TP
.I /etc/rc.d/rc.keymap.toggle
Sidecar file persisting
.B VConsoleKeymapToggle
across reboots. Contains the bare keymap name on a single line.
Absent when no toggle keymap is configured.
Created and managed exclusively by
.BR localed .
Slackware has no native toggle-keymap concept.
.TP
.I /etc/X11/xorg.conf.d/00-keyboard.conf
Xorg
.I InputClass
stanza describing the X11 keyboard layout. Written in the canonical
format used by
.BR systemd-localed (8)
so Xorg picks it up on next start. Watched with
.BR inotify (7).
The directory is created automatically if it does not exist when
.B SetX11Keyboard
is called.
.TP
.I /usr/share/polkit-1/actions/org.freedesktop.locale1.policy
PolKit action declarations and default authorization requirements.
.TP
.I /usr/share/polkit-1/rules.d/org.freedesktop.locale1.rules
PolKit rule granting the configured privileged group unconditional
access to both locale1 actions.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR localectl (1),
.BR locale.conf (5),
.BR vconsole.conf (5),
.BR polkit (8),
.BR pkcheck (1),
.BR inotify (7)
.SH AUTHOR
Nathaniel Russell <naterussell83@gmail.com>
.SH LICENSE
This program is free software, distributed under the GNU General Public
License, version 2 or later. See the source for copying conditions.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at
.UR https://github.com/nater1983/localed
.UE .
